

Citation: Mystakidis, S. Metaverse.
Encyclopedia 2022, 2, 486–497.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
encyclopedia2010031
Academic Editors: Ahmad
Taher Azar and Raffaele Barretta
Received: 28 December 2021
Accepted: 9 February 2022
Published: 10 February 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Entry
Metaverse
Stylianos Mystakidis 1,2
1 School of Natural Sciences, University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece; smyst@upatras.gr
2 School of Humanities, Hellenic Open University, 26335 Patras, Greece
Definition: The Metaverse is the post-reality universe, a perpetual and persistent multiuser environ-
ment merging physical reality with digital virtuality. It is based on the convergence of technologies
that enable multisensory interactions with virtual environments, digital objects and people such as
virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR). Hence, the Metaverse is an interconnected web of
social, networked immersive environments in persistent multiuser platforms. It enables seamless
embodied user communication in real-time and dynamic interactions with digital artifacts. Its first
iteration was a web of virtual worlds where avatars were able to teleport among them. The contem-
porary iteration of the Metaverse features social, immersive VR platforms compatible with massive
multiplayer online video games, open game worlds and AR collaborative spaces.
Keywords: metaverse; mixed reality; virtual reality; augmented reality; extended reality; virtual
worlds; multiuser virtual environments
1. Introduction
Computer Science innovations play a major role in everyday life as they change and
enrich human interaction, communication and social transactions. From the standpoint of
end users, three major technological innovation waves have been recorded centered around
the introduction of personal computers, the Internet and mobile devices, respectively. Cur-
rently, the fourth wave of computing innovation is unfolding around spatial, immersive
technologies such as Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) [ 1]. This wave is ex-
pected to form the next ubiquitous computing paradigm that has the potential to transform
(online) education, business, remote work and entertainment. This new paradigm is the
Metaverse. The word Metaverse is a closed compound word with two components: Meta
(Greek prefix meaning post, after or beyond) and universe. In other words, the Metaverse is
a post-reality universe, a perpetual and persistent multiuser environment merging physical
reality with digital virtuality. Regarding online distance education, Metaverse has the
potential to remedy the fundamental limitations of web-based 2D e-learning tools.
Education is one crucial field for society and economy where core implementation
methods remain unchanged and orbiting around content transmission, classrooms and
textbooks despite numerous technological innovations [ 2]. Currently, there is an intense
race to construct the infrastructure, protocols and standards that will govern the Metaverse.
Large corporations are striving to construct their closed, proprietary hardware and software
ecosystems so as to attract users and become the de facto Metaverse destination. Different
systemic approaches and diverging strategies collide around concepts such as openness
and privacy. The outcome of this race will determine the level of users’ privacy rights
as well as whether the Metaverse will be inclusive to students and school pupils. Both
issues have important implications for education as they will determine if the Metaverse
can become mainstream in e-learning. The aim of this article is to raise awareness about
the origin and the affordances of the Metaverse, so as to formulate a unified vision for
meta-education, Metaverse-powered online distance education.
For this purpose, this article is structured as follows: Definitions of the key concepts
are presented in Section 2. The limitations of two-dimensional learning environments are
Encyclopedia 2022, 2, 486–497. https://doi.org/10.3390/encyclopedia2010031 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/encyclopedia
Encyclopedia 2022, 2 487
summarized in Section 3. A brief historical account of virtual media and VR technology
is illustrated in Section 4. Next, in Section 5, the significance of virtual worlds and VR for
education is presented. Section 6 is dedicated to contemporary Metaverse development,
Meta-education and innovative applications. The conclusions are in the final Section 7.
2. Extended, Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality
Extended Reality or Cross Reality (XR) is an umbrella term that includes a series of
immersive technologies; electronic, digital environments where data are represented and
projected. XR includes Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Mixed Reality
(MR) [ 3]. In all the above-mentioned XR facets, humans observe and interact in a fully or
partially synthetic digital environment constructed by technology.
VR is an alternate, completely separate, digitally created, artificial environment. Users
feel in VR that they are immersed, located in a different world and operate in similar
ways just like in the physical surroundings [ 4]. With the help of specialized multisensory
equipment such as immersion helmets, VR headsets and omnidirectional treadmills, this
experience is amplified through the modalities of vision, sound, touch, movement and the
natural interaction with virtual objects [5,6].
AR adopts a different approach towards physical spaces; it embeds digital inputs,
virtual elements into the physical environment so as to enhance it [ 7]. It spatially merges
the physical with the virtual world [8]. The end outcome is a spatially projected layer of
digital artifacts mediated by devices, e.g., smart phones, tablets, glasses, contact lenses or
other transparent surfaces [9 ]. Moreover, AR can also be implemented in VR headsets with
pass-through mode capability by displaying input from integrated camera sensors.
MR is a more complex concept and its definition has fluctuated across time, reflect-
ing the contemporary technological trends and dominant linguistic meanings and narra-
tives [10 ]. MR is sometimes represented as an advanced AR iteration in the sense that
the physical environment interacts in real time with the projected digital data [10 ]. For
instance, a scripted non-player character in an MR game would recognize the physical
surroundings and hide behind under a desk or behind a couch. Similar to VR, MR requires
special glasses. However, for the purpose of this article, we accept the conception of MR
as any combination of AR and VR as well as intermediate variations such as augmented
virtuality [3 ]. The rationale behind this decision is the long-term technological evolution
and maturation of AR to include interactive affordances. Therefore, AR and VR remain the
two fundamental technologies and MR their combination.
To comprehend and visualize how these immersive technologies interact with the
environment, we point to Milgram and Kishino’s one-dimensional reality–virtuality con-
tinuum [3 ]. This continuum is illustrated as a straight line with two ends. On the left
extremum of the line there is the natural, physical environment. The right end marks the
fully artificial, virtual environment that the user experiences instead of the physical one.
Hence, AR is near the left end of the spectrum while VR occupies the right extremum. MR
is a superset of both.
Multimodal Metaverse Interactions
The Metaverse is based on technologies that enable multisensory interactions with
virtual environments, digital objects and people. The representational fidelity of the
XR system is enabled by stereoscopic displays that are able to convey the perception of
depth [ 11]. This is possible with separate and slightly different displays for each eye that
replicate sight in physical environments [ 11 ]. XR displays with high resolutions activate a
wide user field of view that can span from 90 to 180 degrees. XR systems also offer superior
auditory experiences in comparison to 2D systems. 3D, spatial or binaural audio allows
the construction of soundscapes that enhance immersion decisively in AR and VR [12 ].
The spatial distribution of sound allows users to orientate themselves and identify the
directions of sound cues, a powerful medium for navigation and user attention attraction.
